Open Source Data Science in the Enterprise
Just over the past few years, there have been enormous advances in data analytic capabilities.
The advances in the tools are enormous, but most of the energy is on the open source side of things.
Commercial software development is, of course, constrained by the amount of resources that any
individual company can put into them, whereas on the open source side, there's just the entire
community contributes to development of new capabilities and new tools, in addition to a lot
of professional support from the big tech companies for open source, which is growing by the day.
So you get access to really cutting-edge analytical tools because you use open source.
The other interesting thing is that you get access in the open source community to tools and
capabilities developed in other domains. Whatever domain you are in, maybe it's environmental
sciences or health care, you can get access to tools and packages that were developed for
financial services or vice versa, and you see that kind of cross-fermentation really
power the open source communities. Many of the most widely used and powerful analytical packages
work across multiple languages. TensorFlow is a good example. That is a powerful machine learning
framework that was developed by Google. It's open source, and it's available in all of the
major open source languages, R and Python, to name the two main ones. So people can use the tools
they like to achieve the results in the languages they like, knowing that there's consistency
in terms of the underlying algorithms and operation of all these packages. Finally,
code-based analytics make it easy to see the flow of the analysis, and it's essentially self-auditing.
In highly regulated businesses like health care and financial services, where I came from,
this can be a lifesaver.
Open source is absolutely appropriate for enterprise-level data science.
It's a great way to boost productivity as it can empower all the interested
parties in the organization. At my company, there were many people that I, as a senior manager,
didn't even know about who were working on developing projects using open source tools.
So you can let a thousand flowers bloom. Now, importantly, such freedom can be done with
enterprise-level curation. You can do this in a controlled way. Now, of course, IT likes that
because you don't have a million people launching different things which are
unaudited or unvalidated, but you can still have the same creativity of the team.
Tools like RStudio really help provide this full production life cycle within a curated
environment that is enterprise-grade. There are so many people contributing to that community.
There are so many tremendous packages out there. You can be comfortable that if you're using a
commercial software that has been audited and vetted and has gone through a process before
it was released into the wild, that is greater than what might happen in the open source community.
But at the same time, in the open source community, the crowdsourcing and the enormous
number of people that are contributing means that the quantity of tremendous enterprise-level
packages or tools is much, much larger. There are tools that can help companies
curate, audit, and validate all of those tools that are out there. Packages like RStudio
let you do that and have a walled garden where the appropriateness and quality of all the packages
is monitored within the organization.
My personal experience, building support for open source software in an organization means
starting small. What is very powerful, I think, are small, gee-whiz demonstration projects.
Take this in small bites, projects with quick turnaround that demonstrate value. Then you're
going to have people looking over your shoulder saying, how can I do that? So you don't have to
start out with a large investment. But in my experience, the power of these tools is such that
you very quickly have people saying they want in. They want to try to do some of this stuff
themselves. So you obviously don't want the appearance of going rogue in your organization
and rejecting IT standards. But very quickly, you will find that you develop IT buy-in. I think as
the years have gone by, that's much, much easier to do. I think certainly within our organization,
when I first started getting involved in this stuff, there wasn't a lot of IT support. But by
the time I left my organization, IT was a major sponsor of open source tools because they knew
that they could make sure that anything that was allowed inside the organization did meet our
quality standards.
Certainly not. Executives don't need to know how to code to manage a data science team. I was a coder
and it did help me be a champion with some credibility in the organization. But it's
absolutely not necessary. And you can't really expect that or make that a requirement.
You know, the higher you go in any organization, the more you are going to be responsible for
supervising people who are experts in their domain and know more about that than you do.
I was a CEO. And of course, as most CEOs do, I was promoted through a particular business vertical,
in my case, investments. That's what I had expertise in. But I didn't know anything or I
didn't have any particular expertise in sales or legal and certainly not IT. So an executive
doesn't need to be fluent in all topics and indeed cannot be. But it helps to be conversant. And some
of that is learning on the job. But to do that, at a minimum, you need to be curious. So you will
have lots of people who work for you who will know things you don't and you have to be respectful of
their knowledge. And you need to listen to those people who are coming in and telling you what
needs to be done and listen with an open mind. Ultimately, the leader has to make the decision,
but you want to make it with the best possible input from your teams and being respectful when
someone says, I don't think this is a good idea. But again, leadership is about making the call
at the end of the day. But you have to be very mindful of where the expertise lies in your
organization. And that applies in all areas, of course, including leading data science teams.
I got started in R about 2006. So that's 15 years ago, I became frustrated with the limitations of
Excel. I felt I had taken it as far as I could. One of the things that really bugged me was how
my current self had no idea what my past self did when I opened a spreadsheet from a year or two
prior. So how do I remember where the critical dependencies are across multiple sheets? What
does this formula do? All of these things became very opaque in some of the really big, complicated
spreadsheets that I did. I liked the idea of open source tools. So I discovered and started working
with R. And I started working with one toe in the water. I was moving back and forth with Excel,
importing and exporting data, using some macro tools to manage that. But as the months went on,
I used Excel less and less because I got more fluent with R and found that I was getting
answers faster and getting answers with reusable code much more frequently. So I eventually just
Excel just sort of withered away and I stopped using it. And even when I became a CEO, obviously
playing around with spreadsheets or R wasn't part of my day job. But I'd like to keep my
self sharp in terms of working with R. And this had a good corporate purpose because it helped me
be an evangelist for R within my own organization. And again, by the time I left the company,
these open source tools were an everyday part of analytics across just about all of the verticals
in my company. The power of these tools is so, so large, and it's so easy to find
really cool examples of what you can do with these tools. It doesn't take very much digging.
And certainly, if you look at some of the examples in the R studio gallery,
you see all sorts of stuff, all sorts of gee whiz little projects and dashboards and tools
that for me immediately made me think, wow, yeah, yeah, that could solve a problem I have,
or that would be a great way to present some of the information that's specific to my domain,
even if the information or the data set isn't relevant to my job. So it's very easy to find
things that are very exciting to help advance data science in any organization. And it's still
early going on the power of data science in many organizations. There are many organizations, even
very sophisticated quantitative analytic organizations that haven't gone after the
low-hanging fruit that data science has brought to fruition in the last few years. I'm speaking
from experience on this. So, you know, once the ball gets rolling, it's very easy to keep it going.